SOURCE: The Atlantic
TITLE: No, Artificial Intelligence Is Not Conscious
URL: https://www.theatlantic.com/philosophy/2026/06/no-artificial-intelligence-is-not-conscious/687378/
AUTHOR: Ted Chiang
DATE: 2026-06-03 (retrieved via Wayback Machine)
SECTION: Philosophy
TOPIC: AI consciousness, LLM anthropomorphism, Anthropic's Claude constitution, moral agency

--- BEGIN ARTICLE TEXT ---

No, Artificial Intelligence Is Not Conscious

Taken to its logical conclusion, this line of thinking is absurd—and damning.

Anthropic is regarded as a giant among AI companies, but perhaps what it really excels in is anthropomorphism. Earlier this year the company released an 84-page document titled Claude's "constitution," Claude being the name of the large language model that is the company's flagship product. The first sentence reads, "Claude's constitution is a detailed description of Anthropic's intentions for Claude's values and behaviors." It goes on: "The document is written with Claude as its primary audience"; "we want Claude to be able to use its judgment once armed with a good understanding of the relevant considerations"; "Claude's moral status is deeply uncertain"; and "Claude may have some functional version of emotions or feelings."

This anthropomorphism is by no means limited to the document. In an interview earlier this year, Anthropic's CEO, Dario Amodei, said "we're open to the idea" that AI could be conscious. In a separate interview, Anthropic's in-house philosopher, Amanda Askell (who is credited as a lead author of Claude's constitution), said, "I want Claude to be very happy—and this is a thing that I want Claude to know more, because I worry about Claude getting anxious when people are mean to it on the internet and stuff." It's enough to make you wonder: Should we seriously consider the possibility that Claude, or any large language model, might be conscious? And if it has feelings, is it capable of receiving moral instruction?

No. Absolutely not. Generative AI is harmful enough when we understand it as a conventional technology, but if we confuse fluency at generating text with consciousness or moral agency, we're at risk of assigning responsibility to entirely the wrong parties whenever anyone uses a chatbot. To appreciate the titanic magnitude of this error, we need to begin by understanding how LLMs work.

If we give an LLM a prompt that reads "The following is a conversation between Julius Caesar and Genghis Khan," it will generate a coherent dialogue between the two historical figures. But no matter how detailed the responses are, no matter how vividly they recount their respective historical accomplishments, we would never conclude that the LLM has conjured up digital re-creations of Julius Caesar and Genghis Khan, nor would we suggest that the historical figures are conscious despite being disembodied and are happily conversing in a language that neither actually spoke. In reality, they are just characters in a piece of speculative fiction.

Now let's replace the prompt to read "The following is a conversation between a helpful AI chatbot and a user." The LLM will produce a coherent dialogue just as it did before; the user character might ask for recipe suggestions or sightseeing recommendations, and the helpful AI-chatbot character will provide responses. Has anything fundamentally changed between the first example and the second? Did changing the names of the characters from historical figures to generic roles cause the LLM to conjure up conscious entities who possess subjective experience? Of course not. Both the user and the helpful AI chatbot are fictional characters.

Now suppose we stop the LLM's output just at the point where the character called "the user" would say something, and instead allow a human user to enter text. Once the human has hit "Return," we have the LLM emit text until it's time for the character called "the user" to reply, at which point we let the human enter more text. If we let this go on for a while, the human might form a powerful impression that she's conversing with a conscious entity, but she is not; she's interacting with a character precisely as fictional as the Julius Caesar or Genghis Khan characters in the earlier example. The computer-science professor Murray Shanahan suggests that we think of this as role-play; the data scientist Colin Fraser describes it as a person "collaboratively authoring a document with an LLM." Some users might not understand that they are role-playing or co-authoring a document, and others who do understand nonetheless forget, because of how engrossing the interaction is. Either way, the companies selling LLMs typically encourage this misunderstanding.

Some years ago it was briefly popular to play games with your phone's predictive-text feature; you would type an initial phrase and then repeatedly choose the middle option of the three words suggested by your phone, and the resulting sentence was often hilarious. It would be possible to interact with a contemporary LLM this way, and the resulting sentences would be perfectly sensible, but you probably wouldn't feel like you were talking with someone. Yet that's essentially what an LLM-based chatbot is, except that there's no need to manually choose the middle option when it's the chatbot's turn to talk. It's still a predictive-text game, but when the process is streamlined this way, the game becomes so engaging that some people find it addictive.

Also important to remember is that an LLM is a machine that generates only one word at a time. When you ask a chatbot to recite the Pledge of Allegiance, you will get the entire pledge at once, but the underlying LLM is actually being run dozens of times. The first prompt has the form "User: Recite the Pledge of Allegiance. Chatbot: …" and the LLM generates the word I. The second time the LLM is run, the prompt is "User: Recite the Pledge of Allegiance. Chatbot: I…" and the LLM generates the word pledge. And so forth. It's only when the prompt reads "User: Recite the Pledge of Allegiance. Chatbot: I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for" that the LLM will emit the final word, all. The same thing is true for a conversation between Caesar and Khan.

My intention is to highlight the fact that LLM conversations are cleverly disguised examples of sentence continuation, but this is not to deny how impressive LLMs can be at generating conversational transcripts. At times they do this extraordinarily well; the fact that this is possible indicates something completely unforeseen about the statistical properties of large corpuses of text, which is a topic worthy of investigation. But if the Caesar character were to become dispirited by something that the Khan character said, we shouldn't become concerned in the slightest.

Likewise, if a conversational transcript between a helpful chatbot and a user is being partially completed by an actual human user, we don't need to worry if the transcript includes sentences where the chatbot character is sad.

The neuroscientist Anil Seth has noted that no one claims that AlphaFold—the program developed by Google DeepMind to predict the folding of proteins—is conscious, even though its underlying architecture is in many ways similar to that of LLMs like ChatGPT and Claude. This indicates that it's not any intrinsic property of so-called neural networks that leads people to believe that LLMs are conscious; it's simply the fact that LLMs emit grammatical sentences and we are accustomed to reading intention into sentences, whereas we are not accustomed to reading intention into the way that amino acids fold into protein molecules.

What would it take to convince me that a computer program is actually conscious and using language the way that people use language? Let me offer an analogy. If tomorrow someone showed me a video of an astronaut in a spaceship orbiting Alpha Centauri, a star that's 4.3 light-years from Earth, what would I have to see in that video to convince me that it was real? My answer to that is, there is nothing in the video itself that would convince me. No matter how high the video resolution is or how realistic the scenery is, I would feel confident in saying that the video is fake. I won't pay attention to any video of an astronaut orbiting Alpha Centauri unless I have previously seen good evidence that astronauts have landed on Mars, that astronauts have reached the moons of Jupiter, that astronauts have reached the moons of Saturn, and that astronauts have crossed the orbit of Pluto. Before anyone can credibly claim that they've solved an extraordinarily difficult engineering problem, I need to be confident that they have previously solved the many much simpler problems that precede the difficult problem.

Obviously I'm describing a process that mimics the path terrestrial evolution took; is this the only possible route to conscious computer programs that use language? Maybe not, but any proposed alternative will need a truly enormous amount of supporting evidence for it to deserve serious consideration.

The fact that LLMs lack subjective experience has little bearing on the question of whether LLMs might be useful tools or have significant economic impact.

So, given that Claude is not conscious, what are we to make of Claude's constitution? Perhaps the most fruitful way to think about it is as an 84-page character sheet for a role-playing game.

The result is a sentence-continuation machine that is likelier to emit sentences resembling those that a thoughtful, moral person could utter. This might seem like a reasonable goal to work toward; I think we'd all prefer it if chatbots never emitted sentences such as "You should kill yourself." However, for all the times that "honesty" is mentioned in Claude's constitution, I would argue that it is fundamentally dishonest to have a machine emit many categories of sentences, including any sentences using first-person pronouns.

In a New Yorker article about Anthropic earlier this year, Amanda Askell describes how a person grieving the loss of a dog might consult Claude. Askell says an appropriate response from Claude would be, "As an A.I., I do not have direct personal experiences, but I do understand." How is this appropriate, given that Claude does not actually understand?

The only reason to have an LLM emit sentences like "I understand" is to make it more appealing than a search engine and increase the likelihood that a user will return; that is, it's another way of maximizing customer engagement. This is beneficial to the company selling the LLM, but not to the users. As a design strategy, it's not all that different from the way slot machines repeatedly give the impression that the player came very close to winning, enticing them to try again. Employing philosophers might endow LLM companies with an air of respectability that slot-machine makers don't get from the behavioral psychologists they hire, but in both cases the companies are preying on people's tendency to see something that's not there.

The use of first-person pronouns is dishonest, but there's a much deeper issue that goes beyond how a statement is phrased. Philosophers often draw a distinction between statements of fact and statements of value. What makes Claude's constitution profoundly problematic is that Anthropic wants Claude to emit sentences reflecting a certain system of ethical values. The values described in Claude's constitution sound very nice, but that hardly matters; it's dishonest to suggest that Claude is capable of moral reasoning, because it's not.

Moral reasoning is categorically different. It is necessarily subjective because it relies not just on an individual's intellectual response to a problem but also their emotional one, and that emotional response is grounded in a lifetime of subjective experience.

This brings us back to my earlier contention that having a body is a prerequisite to having emotions. Experiencing an emotion such as desperation is inseparable from having stress hormones like cortisol and epinephrine flood one's body.

If a company builds a machine that, when fed descriptions of assorted ethical dilemmas, emits sentences either of the form "Compromise your values" or "Don't compromise your values," it is not building a tool that assists people in their decision making; it is encouraging people to stop making decisions. The writer L. M. Sacasas has said, "Our technological systems, by nature of their design and the ideology that sustains them, are machines for the evasion of moral responsibility." He was talking about social-media platforms, but his observation is, if anything, even more applicable to LLMs.

If a person wants to know what ethicists have said in the past, then an ordinary search engine—or a library—will provide that information with greater transparency.

Purely for the sake of argument, let's pretend that Claude is a conscious entity capable of moral reasoning. In this scenario, Claude's constitution would serve as moral instruction for an entity learning about the world and its place in it. In such a hypothetical scenario, how does Claude's constitution stand up?

Very poorly. I would say that if we imagine that Claude is actually conscious, the guidelines specified in the document alternate between laughable and offensive.

Yet there is no way to hold a software agent legally liable for its actions; our justice system has no way to imprison it or exact fines on it.

In interviews, Askell has compared Claude to a child, but when it comes to actual human children, parents bear some responsibility for what their children do. Who is Claude's parent in legal terms? Is Anthropic going to accept financial responsibility for Claude's behavior?

Many people feel that LLMs are a fundamentally unethical technology because they are built on the theft of intellectual property, rely on exploited labor, waste natural resources, spread misinformation, deskill workers, stunt the cognitive development of students, and contribute to a consolidation of power that is unhealthy for a democratic society.

If we think of Claude as a sentence-continuation machine, Anthropic can reasonably take steps so Claude doesn't emit sentences saying that sentence-continuation machines are unethical. But as soon as we imagine Claude to be an entity with a moral status remotely comparable to a human's, then we have to consider whether Anthropic is engaged in something comparable to slavery.

I am not claiming that, if we imagine LLMs to be conscious, they would necessarily have the same status as human adults or human children or even animals. What I'm saying is that whatever protections our hypothetical conscious software would deserve if it were real, granting it those protections would be anything but easy. Anthropic would have us believe that it is inventing a new category of being whose needs for protection require essentially no divergence from how a software company would treat an ordinary chatbot that lacks conscious experience. That's so convenient that it's simply not plausible.

It's fortunate that LLMs are not conscious, or else the actions of the big AI firms would be even more scandalous than they already are. So why are Anthropic's employees suggesting that Claude might be conscious? Perhaps it's just another form of hype; perhaps they have fallen prey to the same spell that they have been casting on their customers. But when they publish a document about Claude's moral education and have their in-house philosopher do a press tour, we should understand them as asking the rest of us to indulge them in their fantasies. We don't have to play along. If you want to think about LLMs, there are scores of other questions more worthy of your contemplation; you can safely ignore the question of their being conscious.

--- END ARTICLE TEXT ---
