SOURCE: BuzzFeed
URL: https://www.buzzfeed.com/leylamohammed/lorde-slams-meta-ai-glasses-after-kylie-jenner-collab
DATE: 2026-07-15
RETRIEVED: 2026-07-15
BYLINE: Leyla Mohammed

HEADLINE: Lorde Slams Meta AI Glasses After Kylie Jenner Collab

BODY:

Unless you've been living under a rock, I'm sure you're at least aware of "smart glasses," which are scarily becoming increasingly popular.

The wearable technology features built-in cameras, speakers, and artificial intelligence, enabling them to function as much more than your regular pair of glasses.

Understandably, there have been growing concerns about how invasive smart glasses are — namely because the embedded camera allows wearers to take photos or videos of others without their permission or knowledge.

Many women have been approached by men wearing Meta's AI Ray-Bans and subsequently filmed without their consent, with the videos later uploaded to platforms like TikTok.

Despite the numerous valid concerns, the tech is still being promoted by some of the biggest celebrities. Back in April, BLACKPINK's Jennie was unveiled as a global ambassador for Ray-Ban's Meta AI glasses.

Several fans were left disappointed at the partnership and took to Instagram to voice their thoughts.

More recently, billionaire Kylie Jenner, who has repeatedly expressed her desire for privacy following negative experiences with intrusive photographers throughout her teen years, collaborated with Meta to release the Meta Starfire Kylie Edition AI glasses.

Again, the public response to Kylie's Meta collab was largely negative.

To add insult to injury, Kylie brazenly gushed about her Meta collab during an ad for the technology conglomerate, stating, "We love a tech moment."

With this in mind, internet users are feeling slightly more refreshed after singer Lorde didn't shy away from denouncing the Meta glasses at Madrid's Mad Cool Festival last week.

Momentarily pausing her set, which was interestingly just before Jennie's, Lorde purportedly told the crowd, "Increasingly, in our world, it gets harder and harder to know what is real. Can I just say, for the record, fuck the glasses. Don't get the glasses. Not sexy."

Several fans have since praised Lorde for her refreshing comments about the divisive tech, while drawing comparisons to the celebrities who are gladly promoting it.

"We have Lorde and then we have Kylie and Jennie like why are women of all people promoting and being brand ambassador of these creepy spy glasses. It feels so unsafe and you never know who is recording you," one Reddit user said.

"Tell Lorde to tell Kylie this. My eyes went so far in the back of my head when I saw her commercial for meta glasses," another post read.

"They can never make me hate you, Lorde!! You are the moment!!!!!!!!!" someone said.

"@lorde on the corect side of history as always," one Instagram comment read, while another person said of the singer, "The realest."

Let us know what you think in the comments.
