Whistleblower Sarah Wynn-Williams sues Meta over attempts to 'silence' her

Former employee files complaint accusing company of 'coercive surveillance' and first amendment violation

The Meta whistleblower Sarah Wynn-Williams is suing the tech company over its efforts to "silence" her.

A 57-page complaint filed to a US district court in California on Thursday argues that an interim arbitration ruling sought by Meta preventing Wynn-Williams from publicising her memoir, Careless People, was "improper and unlawful" and a "blatant violation of the first amendment". It also accuses the company of "coercive surveillance".

Wynn-Williams, Meta's former director of global public policy, was fired in 2017. After her departure, she signed a severance agreement that included a non-disparagement clause and mandatory arbitration clause. She alleges Meta made reimbursement of $300,000 in pre-approved business expenses — including travel costs for Mark Zuckerberg — conditional on her signing the agreement. Meta ultimately reimbursed a fraction of the charges, the complaint said.

She also alleges Meta insisted she sign the severance agreement to maintain healthcare coverage for herself and her children, which was "critical" given a "life-threatening health condition" she experienced during childbirth.

Careless People, published by Macmillan's Flatiron imprint in March 2025, alleges a range of wrongdoing by executives at what was then called Facebook, including being willing to hand over millions of Chinese and US citizens' data to the Chinese Communist Party in exchange for access to the Chinese market.

Wynn-Williams also alleges in the complaint that she experienced sexual harassment from her bosses Joel Kaplan, Meta's president of global affairs, and Sheryl Sandberg, Meta's former chief operating officer.

An arbitrator ruled shortly after the book was published that Wynn-Williams had to temporarily stop making "disparaging, critical, or otherwise detrimental comments" about the Facebook owner or its employees, after Meta alleged she had violated terms of her 2017 severance agreement.

"This former employee is trying to use the legal process to sell books, which an arbitrator already ruled broke the agreement she signed with the company when she accepted a large financial settlement years ago," Meta spokesman Andy Stone said in a statement. Stone previously called the book "false and defamatory."

Meta has said Wynn-Williams was fired for "poor performance and toxic behaviour" and that an internal investigation into Kaplan cleared him of any wrongdoing.

Wynn-Williams is requesting that the arbitration order be lifted, the arbitration process halted and her severance agreement voided, and asks for compensatory damages to cover lost book sales and speaking fees. According to the complaint, Meta had sought financial penalties of $50,000 for each purported violation of the gag order — including each book sale.

The next year after Wynn-Williams was fired, Facebook announced that it would no longer force employees to arbitrate claims related to sexual harassment. Facebook's vice president of people touted this policy change as "the right thing to do" and a "pivotal moment for our industry."

California enacted the Silenced No More Act in 2022, making it illegal for employers to use separation agreements that prohibit the disclosure of unlawful workplace acts. Meta's board has said the company complies with the state law, writing in a 2022 proxy statement: "We do not require our personnel to enter into employment agreements that include non-disparagement clauses that would prevent them from discussing workplace conduct."

According to the complaint, Wynn-Williams took these statements — and the lack of any explicit carve-outs for former employees or prior agreements — to mean she was free to speak out. She subsequently filed whistleblower complaints with the Securities and Exchange Commission and Justice Department.

A Meta representative also traveled to the Hay Festival, a prestigious literary event where Wynn-Williams sat in silence on stage for an hour, and Meta requested that the arbitrator sanction Wynn-Williams for attending the event, she alleged in her complaint.

In May, she attended the Hay Festival as an expert panelist on digital technology and public policy — but she sat on stage in complete silence for the full hour, per the advice of her lawyer. After her appearance, sales of Careless People soared more than 300% in the UK.

A representative for Sandberg declined to comment.

Source: The Guardian (theguardian.com), reconstructed from Guardian excerpts, WSJ corroboration, and NY Post corroboration. Published June 25, 2026.
