Meta Lifts Cost of Louisiana Data Center to $50 Billion

Wall Street Journal — July 13, 2026

Meta Platforms has scaled up the size of its massive data-center project in Northeast Louisiana to 5 gigawatts of compute capacity and said it would now cost more than $50 billion.

The project in the rural Richland Parish region, originally pegged at a cost of $27 billion, will be the company's largest data center. The latest expansion also makes it one of the largest investments in artificial-intelligence infrastructure in the world, Meta said Monday.

Private-credit manager Blue Owl Capital owns a major stake in the project, which has attracted investors including BlackRock, according to The Wall Street Journal.

Meta said it has agreed to pay the costs of energy, water and related infrastructure used by the data center. In March, it reached a deal with Entergy Louisiana to fund the energy infrastructure of the project.

Already, increased tax revenue linked to the project has translated to annual bonuses of up to around $50,000 for teachers in the local school district. For some teachers, the bonuses may be larger than their salaries.

Officials in the Richland Parish community said the project has brought an influx of economic activity that is breathing new life into the region.

"Meta's investment has made Richland Parish a destination for education as well as industry," Richland Parish School District Superintendent Sheldon Jones said, according to a Meta blog post on Monday.

The project is underway amid growing public opposition to data centers around the U.S. Their effect on affordability has been repeatedly cited in polls and public comments as a concern.

The Wall Street Journal previously reported that the project in Louisiana had raised concerns about burdening Louisiana electricity customers with higher costs.

Across much of the country, the rapid buildout of energy-hungry data centers has led to taxed grids and surging electricity prices, prompting calls for tech companies to provide for their own energy needs.

Publication: Wall Street Journal (wsj.com)
Topic: AI infrastructure investment, data center expansion, community impact
Date: July 13, 2026
Sources referenced: Meta (company statement/blog post), Blue Owl Capital, BlackRock, Entergy Louisiana, Sheldon Jones (Richland Parish School District Superintendent)
Cross-references: Reuters version, Fox Business version, Barron's coverage, IBD coverage
